Burger King's Secret STRATEGY to compete with McDonald's.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In its 70 years of existence,  
Burger King has gone from being a modest  Burger Outlet to becoming the second 
largest fast-food chain in the world, with more  than 17000 Outlets all across the world. And 
even during the pandemic, It has been extremely  profitable with a profit of 823 million dollars. 
But while most of us are familiar with  the glorified success of Burger King,  
very few of us know that In 2009,  
the brand image of Burger King was in deep  deep trouble. While on one side, McDonald's 
was expanding rapidly capturing every inch of  the market. On the other side, Burger King was 
in a mess. They had changed 13 CEOs In just three  decades. The stores were shutting down rapidly. 
The shares had dropped by 18%  and profit had fallen by 10%  
to just 44 million dollars. But something magical happened in 2010, when an investment firm  
called 3G Capital took over the company and appointed one of the youngest CEOs
in fast food history, who went by the name Daniel  Schwartz. Back then, Daniel was only 32 years 
old. And the weirdest thing was that, he did not  have any experience in the restaurant business. 
In fact, he spent most of  the time in core Finance,  
but as usual, while most of the industry experts undermined his capabilities, This guy did such an  
incredible job that when the same Burger King went public again in 2012,  
in just 18 months, the stock price  shot up by 100%. The question 
is, how did such a young man with no experience  in the restaurant business achieve something 
so extraordinary? What exactly was his business  strategy? And most importantly, as future 
Business Leaders, what are the lessons that we  need to learn from this incredible Businessman? 
This video is brought to you by Amazon sellers.  But more on this at the end of the video.  
The first thing that Danial did was something that no  
ordinary CEO would ever do. And that is, scrubbing the floors and cleaning the toilets. Yes,
You heard that right? When Daniel took  over the leadership of the company,  
Since he had no experience in the restaurant business,  
He decided to get down to the ground  and actually walk with the Burger 
King employees to try and understand what exactly  was the fundamental problem with the operation. 
And this involved doing everything from making  burgers to cleaning the toilets. And in this 
wonderful process, Daniel learned that there  were four fundamental problems with the operation 
of every Burger King Outlet. Number one, the menu  was extremely cluttered with a lot of options 
that confused the customers. And in spite of  having so many options, there was no signature 
dish that was popular enough to attract loyal  customers. Number two, although Burgers as an 
individual product were a very good value addition  to the menu, when the employees were actually 
making these burgers, the kitchen got cluttered.  As a result, there were a lot of sauces and 
a lot of ingredients.  Eventually, this reduced both
the efficiency and the accuracy of making burgers.  
Thirdly, this inefficiency increased the wait times, and it gave the  
drive-thru customers a terrible  experience. Now this was a very, 
very big deal, because you see the drive-thru  customers contributed to more than 60 percent 
of the revenue for both McDonald's and Burger  King. And from the consumer standpoint, if the 
order gets delayed by an average of just one  minute three terrible things happen. Number one, 
the customer who's fifth in line has to wait for  5 extra minutes in hunger, which is a terrible 
time to annoy anyone. Number two, during the peak  times, when the cars got lined up at the store, 
If another customer wants to eat at the Burger  King store, He will skip and move on to the next 
Outlet merely by looking at the long line. As  a result, The number of burgers sold decreased 
by a large extent at every single Outlet. And  last and most importantly, in the race of having 
a diverse menu, in spite of  all the inefficiency, very
few products in the menu were actually high  profit margin products. Therefore, when these 
inefficient practices were repeated for a  million orders all across the United States, it 
costed Burger King millions of dollars in  profits. So you know what? Daniel Schwartz took a 
bold step and decided to eliminate a dozen items  from the menu. And he presented only Whopper 
as the signature dish of Burger King. And since  then, starting from the marketing campaigns, 
all the way up to the menu, even the Instagram  post, Whopper has always been presented as the 
signature dish of Burger King. This is the reason  why, if I asked you to name two other burgers 
that Burger King sells other than the Whooper,  you will have a hard time remembering them in 
spite of making countless visits to the Burger  King store. Now this seemingly simple move, 
ladies and gentleman, brought along an insane  amount of benefits for the Burger King brand. 
Number one, out of the 2.4 billion  hamburgers that was sold, 2.1 billion of
them that is, more than 87 %  of the burgers that were sold  
at Burger King were just Whoppers. Secondly, because 87% of the orders were of the same Burger,  
there were very less sauces,  very less ingredients. 
As a result, There was no confusion inside the  stores. This skyrocketed the efficiency and 
brought down the wait times by a large extent.  Apart from that, the supply chain inventory also 
became extremely lean and extremely efficient.  And last and most importantly, the most amazing 
thing about the Whooper is that, it is a high  margin product. Now, although Burger King doesn't 
reveal how much profit it  makes with every Whopper,  
It is said to be around 50 to 80%. And just like that, when such a high degree of efficiency  
and profit margins were repeated for millions of orders throughout the United States, it started  
to give out millions of dollars in profits. This is the primary reason why Burger King became  
an extremely successful brand after 2010. But Daniel Schwartz did not stop
there. He further went deeper into the cause  and found out every little cause of the company 
was incurring, starting with the office supplies  to the executive travel. That is when he found 
out, that there were already two years of office  supply, and there were a lot of unnecessary 
spending that needed to be cut down.  So he started cutting down on things  
as small as pen and paper also. Apart from that,  
He made a bold statement and sold the  corporate Jet and ask ed the executives 
to use Skype call to do the meetings. And even by  a modest calculations, they are estimated saving 
was at least 5321 dollars per  online meating. That's 3.9 lakhs  
per meeting. And after this ground work was done, one final thing needed to be fixed  
and that was the marketing of the Burger King brand. But on the outset, no company, especially  
after becoming as efficient as Burger King would ever think twice before shooting up their  
marketing budget, right? After all, marketing is one of the greatest
Investments a company can make. But in case of  Burger King, they wanted to achieve externally 
visibility and at the same time, spent very  less on marketing. Now, this looks impossible, 
right? Well, guess what? Burger King deployed a  marketing strategy that was based on a fundamental 
attribute of human psychology and that is,  conflict breeds attention In simple words, rhe 
reason why Big Boss is a hit is because conflict  breeds attention. The reason why Ekta Kapoor 
serials are a hit is because conflict breeds  attention. And the reason why news anchors bully 
their guests during prime time is because conflict  breeds attention. So you know what? Burger 
King purposefully started trolling and calling  out their rival McDonald's in the social media 
posts and the Billboards inviting a conflict.  And soon enough, McDonald's started to respond. 
As a result, The conflict started breeding  attention. And not so surprisingly, hundreds of 
blogs started reporting about the  marketing war that was happening
between Burger King and McDonald's. And people  like you and me started retweeting their ads. 
And a large chunk of the customer base even  participated in the campaign like the burn the ad 
campaign and this participation of the customers  indicated the extraordinary impact of this 
marketing campaign. This is how time and again,  Burger King gets billions of dollars worth 
of publicity through organic blogs, International  media and social media Impressions. And 
the best part is they only  have to spend a fraction of  
their marketing budget to create the conflict. And then, the attention that the conflict breeds  
eventually leads to Snowball Effect, creating billions of Impressions on social media,  
eventually giving Burger King the publicity that 
it never paid for. These are the reasons  why Burger King today is not just one of  
the fastest growing chains in the world,  
but also one of the most profitable food  chains in the world. Now this brings 
me to the meat of the matter and  that are the lessons from the
case study and the study material that  is related to the case study to help  
you sharpen your business acumen. Before we move on,  
I want to thank our sponsors for  today's episode and that is Amazon 
sellers. If you're someone who sells your products  offline or has very less sales online, You 
should consider selling on Amazon. Now, I don't  have to introduce Amazon as a brand to you, but 
due to its sheer size, most sellers think that  it's very difficult to sell on Amazon. But the 
fact is that it's very easy to register yourself  as a seller on Amazon and grow your business. 
All you need is your GST,  Pan and email ID along with  
a product. So if you're someone, who's looking out to expose your products to crows of customers  
all across the country, and if you want to start selling online without having to worrying  
about Inventory management or delivery across a 100+ serviceable PIN codes, Then Amazon is the  
place for you. Amazon provides hassle-free home deliveries and the liberty to list
your products at your own price. So to start  selling on Amazon, use a link in the description 
and register yourself as a seller now. Moving  on to the lessons from the case study, there are 
three important pointers that we need to learn  from this case study. Number one, great leaders 
never shy away from getting their hands dirty,  and they will go to any extent to understand their 
business to understand their company better.  In this case, It was the humility and audacity 
of Daniel Schwartz to go and do the menial jobs at  the store inspite of being the CEO. Lesson Number 
two, micro cause and micro inefficiencies are  more often than not, the heaviest expenses that 
go unnoticed, and they often lead to a chain of  expenses and inefficiencies that will drag your 
business down without even you knowing it. So  always try to keep the processes lean and the cost 
low, no matter how big your company  is. For this, If you are at a sea  
level position or at the management level, I would highly recommend
you to do a quarterly review of  the micro expenses at your company.  
And when you are done calculating, show it your employees and tell them  
how important it is to spend  cautiously. And lastly, conflict 
is a marketing superpower that breeds attention.  So as consumers make sure that you don't become 
a spectator of someone else's stupid conflict.