How Coca-Cola sold sugared water for over 100 years? | Marketing Casestudy

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

and a lot of sugar is not good for your body, so
do not consume Coke in excessive quantities.
And third and most importantly
What I've just told you
that Coke is nothing but sugared water and it's bad for health;
everybody knows about it.
But have you ever wondered, inspite of this brand merely selling sugared water
how is it that they are able to generate billion dollar profits
every single year ?
And not just that.
Coca-Cola is a company that has survived for more than 111 years
which includes 7 revolutions and 2 World Wars.
The question is
How is it possible that a company selling sugared water
could make a billion dollars inspite of having competitors
which are much more tastier than Coca-Cola
and much more healthier than Coca-Cola.
And a simple example of that is the lemonade business in India.
The answer to that is
that Coca-Cola deploys a genius marketing strategy
because of which Coca-Cola is able to make a billion dollars in profits
merely by selling sugared water.
So if you're here to learn something incredible
Let's do a deep dive and try to understand
one of the greatest marketing strategies ever known to mankind
and that is Coca-Cola.
In 2005, there was this scientist called Reed Montague
who conducted a very simple experiment to try and understand
as to what exactly is the difference between Coca-Cola and Pepsi
and which one was more preferred by people.
So he conducted this simple experiment with 3 iterations.
In the first iteration, he placed two bottles
one of Coke and the other of Pepsi
and he took off the label so that people couldn't identify on the outside
which one is Coke and which one is Pepsi.
So, when he called the subjects to come and taste both the colas
he scanned their brains through an fMRI scanner.
And the first iteration when people came and tasted both the colas
from the bottles which were not labelled.
They were not even able to identify the difference between both the colas.
And the fMRI scanner also did not show any difference in the reading.
So he sends them back and calls them in for a second iteration
This time, he puts the labels back on so that people can identify
which one is Coke and which one is Pepsi.
This time when the subjects come and taste Pepsi
nothing happens.
But the moment they tasted Coca-Cola,
the fMRI scanner showed a significant difference in the reading.
That's when Reed Montague thought, 'Maybe there's something to the recipe.
So let's send them back and call them in for a third iteration.'
This time he swapped the logos, which meant
that the bottle that contained Coca-Cola was now labelled as Pepsi
and the bottle that contained Pepsi was now labelled as Coca-Cola.
This time when the subjects came and tasted
the cola from the Pepsi labelled bottle
nothing happened
But the moment they tasted the cola from the Coca-Cola labelled bottle
the fMRI scanner showed the same significant difference in the reading.
And that is when Reed Montague understood
that it's not the cola, it's not the bottle, it's not the subjects
it is just the flash of the red colour logo
of Coca-Cola that made that significant difference in the reading.
Now, to put that straight people
in front of the scenes it's just the 3 second logo flash
that made a significant difference in the reading
and altered the very perception of people
whereas behind the scenes it clearly justifies the billion dollar budget
that Coca-Cola takes out every single year
to establish itself as the brand icon of happiness.
Now, people, the question is
what do we exactly mean by brand icon of happiness.
So for that let's try to understand the fundamentals of marketing.
So every product, people, has two kinds of values
The first value is the Tangible value which is the real value of the product
and the second value is the perceived value.
Now, just to give you a simple example of the same
take, for example, a restaurant.
Now, when you go to a restaurant
the aroma, the room freshner, the ambience, the lighting
is what is going to make up for the perceived value of the product.
It is goinng to enhance your perception of the experience
And the tangible value of the product is how well the food is cooked
So if I serve you rotten chicken in the best restaurant in the world
you're still not going to like it, right ?
Because the true value of the product is nothing but the product
of the tangible value and the perceived value.
So even if one of them is bad
the value of the product goes down.
Similarly, if I were to serve you
the best food in the world but I put dead cockroaches around the table
you're still going to feel disgusted, right ?
Now, the question is you still have the best food on the table
and the cockroaches are not even inside the food.
Why do you still not like experience ?
And the answer to that is
even though the tangible value of the product is great
the perception of the product has been degraded to such an extent
that the experience is completely ruined.
So every company needs to make sure
that it is able to build great products
hence bringing up tangible value of the product
and it has to make sure that the marketing strategies are so well designed
that it is able to enhance the perception of the product
in the minds of the people.
Now, when it comes to Coca-Cola, the tangible value of the product is sugar
and by default, scientifically speaking
sugar is bound to give you pleasure
whereas when it comes to the perception of the product
Coca-Cola does an extraordinary job
by associating itself by the emotion of happiness.
Now a classic example of the association with the emotion can be seen
when Coca-Cola penetrated the Indian population
using its remarkable marketing strategy.
So to put that straight, when Coca-Cola came to India
they were facing a hard time because they did not know
what type of commercial to bring in
which is going to resonate with the entire country
because we are such a beautifully complex country
that when you go from one state to other
the tradition changes, the culture changes, the language changes
lifestyle also changes.
So, how does a brand come out with a commercial
which is going to resonate with the entire country.
And that is when after doing a deep research
they found this beautiful recipe of something called
the game of cricket.
Because Coca-Cola, after doing a deep market research, understood
that in India, regardless of your religion, caste, race, sex
in the game of cricket everybody is an Indian
and everybody is going to cheer, "Sachin! Sachin!"
And guess what they hired Sachin Tendulkar as their brand ambassador
and came out with a beautiful campaign called
"Coke ki khushi, Cricket ki Khushi"
And they came out with a bunch of commercials
which portrayed the true essence of the game of cricket
and this is what the commercial looks like.
If you look closely at that commercial, it is not even talking about the product
until the last 3 seconds
because you know what
while good brands sell you products, legendary brands sell you an emotion
and that is the secret behind Coca-Cola's genius marketing strategy.
So, to put that straight, there are a few lessons
that you need to learn as an entrepreneur
if you want to do the same for your product.
Number one, like I said while good brands sell you their product
legendary brands will always try and sell you an emotion.
Number two, it is okay if you don't talk about specifications.
All you have to do is tell a great story.
And if you do that you're going to resonate with your customers
more than anybody else.
Number three and most importantly
even if you're selling sugared water, you could still make a billion dollars.

