How MAGGI's GENIUS Marketing Strategy made it a Market Leader?: Nestle Business Case Study.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Maggi is one of the most iconic
brands in the Indian business history.
And for our generation, it's even more special
because it has been an integral part of our childhood.
But from the business standpoint, the most fascinating
thing about Maggi is that way back in 1983, both Maggi and
instant noodles were completely alien to the Indian culture.
And yet, Nestle single-handedly created a Rs 937 crore market
and has been a market leader in the domain for 38 years.
And in spite of giant rivals like ITC, Marico,
and Unilever, even today, Maggi has a whopping
60% market share in the instant noodle segment.
The question is, how did Nestle create a
market for a seemingly alien dish in India?
How did it almost establish a monopoly
in the instant noodles market?
And what are the lessons that we need to
learn from Nestle's genius marketing strategy?
This episode is brought to you buy NaVi health
insurance but more on this at the end of the video.
This is a story that dates back to the 1950s,
Japan.During that time, the country was still
recovering from the downfall of World War Two.
So noodles were one of the most affordable foods in the market.
But because the demand was too high, and
it took a lot of time to be prepared, it
resulted into long lines and long wait times.
This is when a curious Japanese man named
Momofuku Ando decided to make a type of noodles
that could be prepared quickly and cheaply.
And after hundreds of iteration, he was finally
successful in making a revolutionary product that
we all know today as the instant Ramen noodles.Now
although his newly invented instant ramen did not
debut until 1958, the instant ramen noodles became a
game-changing business during the economic boom in Japan.
And as the country started developing rapidly, the
instant ramen became such a big hit that in spite of
costing six times more than the conventional noodles, the
Japanese still bought instant ramen in large quantities.
And soon enough, the instant ramen products started
traveling abroad to the US to again become a massive hit.
And even today, the parent company of ramen Nissin accounts
for 50% of the billion-dollar instant noodle market in Japan.
And while all of this was happening, Nestle was
carefully observing the market and realized that
instant noodles are a goldmine product in Japan.
But very, very cleverly, Nestle chose not to
pursue the Japanese market, in spite of knowing
that there was a billion-dollar worth of market
share still left to be capitalized in Japan.
The question is when there was a clear market for
a scalable product that too in a booming economy,
why didn't Nestle enter the Japanese market?
Now there are two seemingly logical reasons for that.
Number one, Japan was not so liberal hence, it would have
been very difficult to operate as a foreign company in Japan.
And secondly, why go on war against a monopoly
when you can create your own monopoly?
Right?
Well, that is why Nestle started exploring every other
market except Japan to create a market for instant noodles.
And one of the biggest markets obviously was India.
And that is how ladies and gentlemen,
Nestle entered the Indian market in 1983.
And like I said before, both the concept of instant noodles
and the Maggi brand was completely alien to us.We were still a
closed country with hardly any foreign companies in the market.
And the western influence over us was relatively very less.
It's almost like asking our parents
to eat lasagna every single day.
Then the question is, how did Nestle turned
Maggi into such an integral part of our lives?
Well, that is because Nestle very clearly
understood both its customer and the consumers.
To tell you about it if you look at instant noodles as a
product, anyone and everyone could have noodles, right?
It really doesn't matter whether it
is a school kid or a 40-year-old man.
And noodles by default is one of the
most generic dishes in the market.
So had it been some ordinary brands, they would
have tried to capture the entire 740 million Indian
customer base, and they would have tried to sell
to every single Indian who could have had noodles.
And on the outset, it does seem like an obvious choice, right?
Well, Nestle was no ordinary brand.
And they understood the fundamental marketing principle that if
you try to sell to everyone, you will end up selling to no one.
So Nestle's marketing team started finding the best niche
profiles to see who could be their ideal target audience.
And that is when they carefully picked two
categories, and those were mothers and children.
Now, this begs the question, what was the thinking behind this?
Now listen to this very, very carefully.
For the adoption of an alien product, it
has to meaningfully cater to the pain of the
audience and the interest of the audience.
Now, in the case of Nestle, there were two primary
stakeholders, there is the customer and there is the consumer.
The consumer is the child who eats Maggi and the customer
is the mother who buys Maggi.And during 1983 there were
two categories of mothers, working mothers, and homemakers.
Both of them had one major pain that is to
give their child something tasty and healthy
when they come back hungry from school.
The problem with working parents was that they were not at home
and with homemakers, after running all morning, after sending
the kids and husbands to school and work, they needed some
time to rest before they could start working again for dinner.
On top of that, the child had just eaten
chapati-bhaji in school, so giving them the same
for evening snacks would not be good enough.
And at the same time, they needed to make
something that was less tedious, but at the
same time was tasty enough for the child to eat.
So the two pains over here are working mothers wanted
something that the children could make themselves and
homemakers wanted something less tiring to make for their kids.
And the interest was obviously a
tasty dish for their child to eat.
And this is where ladies and gentlemen, Maggi
became an opportunist and positioned itself as
the perfect solution for mothers as a super easy
and tasty meal alternative for their children.
This is how the tagline "2 minute mein Maggi" was born.
And as we've seen in the commercial it showcases
an act of a mother preparing Maggi for the kids
only to see them happy and delighted by the taste.
Apart from that, Nestle reached out to school
kids sponsored quizzes and events and even
gave them a free hamper of Maggi products.
This was followed by a widespread sampling
with over 4 million new contacts every year.
And as time passed, Nestle even began advertising on TV
channels during peak times when people like you and me were
watching Power Rangers, Dragonball Z, and Ninja Hatori.
This is how by positioning itself accurately to cater to
the pain and interest of both its consumers and customers,
Maggi established itself as an integral part of our lives.
Now the question is if Maggi could establish
a name in the market, so could others, right?
Because there were already other big
guns like ITC, Unilever, and Nissin.
Then the question is, why couldn't they compete with Maggi?
Well, there are three specific reasons for that.
Number one, Nestle had evolved its supply chain for 25
long years, which was next to impossible to replicate.
And on top of that, it controls the supply chain end to end.
But when Nissin the parent company of ramen tried to enter
the market, it struggled to find national distribution
partners, and its alliances with both Hindustan Unilever
and Mariko to solve this problem completely failed.
Secondly, Nestle achieved an unmatched level of penetration
even in tier three and tier four cities of India.
And more people knew the term Maggi than they knew
about the actual product that is instant noodles.
So no one really asked for instant noodles
they just asked for a packet of Maggi.
This was because, since 2005 onwards, the
marketers of Nestle conducted exclusive studies
and did everything in their capacity to make Maggi
accessible to the bottom of the pyramid of India.
And in technical terms, based on socio-economic status,
the Indian audience could be categorized into eight
categories, ranging from A-1 to E-2.The top segment
consisted of SEC classes as in socio-economic classes
of A-1, A-2, and B-1, the middle segment was B-2 and
C and the bottom segment was D, E-1 one, and E-2.
For those who do not understand these terminologies,
I'll attach study material for you in the description.
So coming back, the top and middle segment was already
captured by 2005 through Maggi's conventional marketing
efforts, and they saw that the real opportunity was in SEC
classes C and D that represented over 40% of the market.
And after an extensive study, the first product to be
launched was Chotu Maggi, which was priced at just Rs 5 and
was aimed at penetrating the lower segment of the market.
The communication was carefully designed in local vernacular
languages, and the distribution system was intricately
designed with strategic wholesalers and redistributors to
reach up to 2.2 million outlets all across the country.
And because of this extensive effort, the household
penetration numbers of Maggi shot from just 45% to
71% for the C class, and from 31% to 62% for SEC
classes D and E in just four years from 2006 to 2010.
This is the reason why when ITC and Unilever entered
the market, they found it very difficult to achieve
this level of penetration and brand recall value.
And lastly, it was the impeccable connect
that Maggi had established with its customers.
And this is something that does not need any
explanation, but a classic demonstration of the
same was seen in 2015 when this happened to Maggi.
As soon as this bad happened, Maggi disappeared from
the stores for five long months and their market
share nosedived from 75% to 0% within no time.
But you know what, guys?
As soon as Maggi came back they came up with something called
'#WeMissYouToo' campaign wherein the brand asked fans to share
their stories about how much they missed Maggi on social media.
Now you see, this is not some Michael Jordan's Nike
product or a revolutionary iPhone that we're talking about.
It is just an instant noodle brand
expecting fans to share their memories.
But as we all saw, it turned out to be one of the most
successful campaigns Nestle had ever executed, and fans from
all across the country started pouring their love for Maggi.
In fact, Snapdeal sold out a whopping 60,000 Maggi
welcome kits within five minutes of the Maggi flash sale.
And hashtags such as '#DilKiDealWithMAGGI' started
trending on Twitter after the sale resumed.
This was the extraordinary level of connection
that Maggi had established with its audience.
And not so surprisingly, it was very, very difficult
for Unilever or Nissin to achieve this level of
connection with a player like Maggi in the market.
And guess what?
By 2017, Maggi was back to the number one spot in the market
with a whopping 60% market share in the instant noodles market.
This is the iconic story of the Maggi brand.
Now, this brings me to the most important
part of the episode, and that are the lessons
from Maggi's genius marketing strategy.
Meanwhile, people I don't know if Maggi is dangerous for you or
not, but not having health insurance is definitely dangerous.
The most dreadful part of insurance is
the claim processing which only gets worse
after we meet with an unfortunate accident.
That's where NaVi health insurance comes in.
And their vision is to turn the entire claim process
into a seamless experience so that you can focus on
healing and not keep stressing over your insurance claim.
This is the reason why NaVi provides 100% cashless claims in
less than 20 minutes, which means you do not have to go through
the hassle of the claim reimbursement process, you will be
assigned a personalized claim relationship manager who will
act as a single point of contact between you and your insurer.
And the CRM assists the customers throughout the
claim process making it fast, easy, and hassle-free.
NaVi health insurance has a network of 10,000 plus
hospitals and a monthly health insurance premium starting
at just Rs 241.You will also get the unlimited automatic
sum insured refill and free doctor consultations.
The best part is that everything is
seamless, digital, and paperless.
So if you want to have a pain-free experience while claiming
your insurance, please go ahead and sign up at the NaVi health
app in less than two minutes using the link in the description.
Moving on, there are four lessons that we need to
learn from Nestle's incredible business strategy.
Lesson number one always remember while most
brands spend time and resources to find out how
to penetrate a market only a few brands spend time
and money to find out which market to penetrate.
And so the most revolutionary products in the
market are more often than not the products
that have created a market for themselves.
And it's not just Nestle.
Even Apple never tried to compete with Rolex to make mechanical
watches, they instead created a market for smartwatches.
And now they're way ahead of any
other watch company in the world.
Similarly, Henry Ford had the option to
compete with luxury cars, but he instead
created a market for the bottom of the pyramid.
And in our case, Maggi created a market for instant noodles
in India, instead of going head-on with Nissin in Japan.
Lesson number two, if you're selling a generic
product, your first instinct would be to
sell to every single person in the market.
But always remember, if you try to sell to
everyone, you will end up selling to no one.
So always try to find a specific target audience to sell your
generic product.And drop a comment about if you know any other
brand that sells a generic product to a specific audience.
And for the people who have done the communication
masterclass you already know which brand I'm talking about.
Lesson number three the golden recipe to market penetration
lies in identifying the pain and interest of the audience.
And your accuracy with spotting this pain and interest is
directly proportional to the ease of adoption of your product.
In this case, it was Nestle's intricate
understanding of the mother's pain of being too
tired to make an evening meal for the children.
And the interest was so beautifully captured through
Nestle's initiatives to interact with children by the
means of cartoon channels and school competitions.
And lastly, like I've said many times before, while good
brands sell you a product, great brands sell you an emotion.
And even if you're selling something as simple as a dry cake
of noodles, if you connect with the audience at an emotional
level, you will stand out from the rest of the crowd.
Like a legend once said, "people might forget what you
said but they never ever forget how you made them feel".