1. What Steve Jobs learnt from Nike's marketing campaign that beat its rival Adidas.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The story that I'm about to tell you today is the story of a brand
that is not just an inspiration for people like you and me
but also for a legend like Steve Jobs.
People, in 1996 when Steve Jobs came back to Apple
Apple was crippling with losses because of 11 consecutive years of failure
and it was almost about to go bankrupt.
During this time when Steve Jobs came back to the company
the biggest challenge that he faced was the reputation of the company
which had degraded to such an extent that people had completely lost faith.
And that is the reason why he had to do something magical
to actually bring the company back on track.
During this time he came out with a legendary campaign called the 'Think Different' campaign
which even today is known as one of the greatest marketing campaigns ever.
And you know what people?
This campaign brought back the trust of the common man in Apple
and laid a solid foundation to such an extent
that today, if Apple is a trillion dollar company
it is only because of legendary campaigns like the 'Think Different' campaign.
So, when I was doing a deep dive
to try and understand what exactly was Steve Jobs thinking while he was designing the 'Think Different' campaign
I found an archived video wherein Steve Jobs is addressing his executive
and he states Nike to be one of his inspirations for the 'Think Different' campaign.
And that's when I started to think
what exactly is so special about a company that sells shoes
that it was able to inspire a legend like Steve Jobs.
And that's what is going to be the subject of this episode
wherein we are going to decode the historic greatness of Nike
with a classic example.
So, the story dates back to the year 2012 when Summer Olympics was being held in London.
And because the Summer Olympics was being held
all the sports brands were very eager to become the title sponsors of the Olympics
because they knew that if they could become the title sponsor of the Olympics
they could pump in a lot of profit.
So, the auction was held and the title sponsorship went to Adidas
and Nike lost its chance to become the title sponsor to its arch rival.
And adidas paid $150 million just to be the title sponsor of the Olympics.
And every time we hear a figure like this, the first question that comes to our mind is
what exactly is so special about the title sponsorship
that you would pay $150 million just to be associated with the name of Olympics.
And the answer to that lies in a very simple example
that is very closer to our home, that is, Vivo's title sponsorship to IPL.
Now, when I understood that Vivo is going to pay Rs 2,200 crores
just to get its name as 'Vivo IPL'
I got completely shocked
and that is when I looked at the growth of Vivo in 2018 and 2019
and as it turns out,
in 2018 Q1, that is, just before the IPL started
Vivo was shipping about 2.1 million units, alright?
But one year later, after the IPL happened
in the exact same quarter in 2019
Vivo was shipping 4.5 million units.
That's a staggering growth of more than 100%
in the world's second largest mobile market.
And this is the reason why
title sponsorship of any popular sports event
is a goldmine investment for any company.
And that's the reason why Olympics was like a golden gateway
for adidas to get way ahead of Nike.
And specifically, they also sat down with the Olympics committee
to try to make sure that they make such stringent rules
that no other brand, let alone Nike
will be able to steal their thunder by actually associating their name with Olympics.
So, the Olympics committee came out with a bunch of strict rules and regulations
that have to be followed by every single brand in such a way
that they could in no way associate themselves with the Olympics
and by the way this also included a list of words
which included the words 'London Olympics', 'Summer Olympics', 'Olympics', '2012'
'The rings of the Olympics' and so on and so forth.
So, theoretically it was made impossible for any brand
to get associated with Olympics
in any way that would steal the thunder of Adidas as a brand.
So, with all of this put together everybody thought that Adidas is now going to go viral
it's going to remain at the top of the chart
because now it is the title sponsor of the Olympics.
But you know what? There was a slight twist in between
and when the actual results came out
as it turns out, while adidas had about 9,000 tweets
associating adidas with the Olympics,
there were about 16,000 tweets that associated Nike with the Olympics.
Not just that, during the tenure of the Olympics
that is, starting from the opening ceremony to the closing ceremony
adidas added about 12,000 followers to its social media handle
while Nike added 57,000 followers to its social media handle.
And the cherry on the cake is
there was a survey that was conducted in the US
wherein people were asked 'Who do you exactly think is the title sponsor of the Olympics?'
21% of those people thought that adidas is the title sponsor of the Olympics
BUT
37% of the people identified Nike to be the title sponsor of the Olympics.
Which means what?
Millions and millions of people were thinking
that Nike was the title sponsor of the Olympics and not adidas!
So, the question is
without being the title sponsor of the Olympics;
without spending $150 million;
without even using the keywords to associate yourself with the Olympics;
How is it even practically possible for a brand to acquire more publicity
than the real title sponsor?
And that's where the legendary strategy of Nike comes into play.
So, the first thing that they understood was
regardless of how complex the system is, there will always be a loophole.
And they found 3 loopholes.
The first loophole that they found was
regardless of whoever is the title sponsor of the Olympics
the athletes were free to choose whichever shoe they wanted.
And that is the reason why
Nike hired 400 Olympians to be its brand ambassador
and just asked them to wear the Nike shoe that they were given
And Nike came front with a quirky line of shoes which was named as Volt
wherein they distributed yellow-green coloured shoes
to the athletes to be worn during their matches.
And the reason why they specifically chose the yellow-green lineup was because
that colour was in perfect contrast of the tracks of the Olympics.
The second loophole that they found was in this rule
which prohibited Nike from showcasing the London of UK in their commercials.
But you know what?
The loophole here is
that there are 28 other locations in this world
which are named as London except the London of UK.
So, Nike shot their commercials in all other Londons
except London in UK.
So, the commercials were shot in London in Ohio,
Little London in Jamaica,
the London Hotel, the London Gym
Small London in Nigeria and even the London Road.
And very smartly
Nike was able to place the word 'London' in all of its commercials, legally.
And third and most importantly and here's where the sweet spot is.
Usually if you look at these Nike and Adidas commercials
you will see all the celebrities endorsing the brand
but when it comes to Nike, for the Olympics, they were not allowed to use Olympians for endorsement.
So, while adidas was actually flaunting all of its commercials
by hiring all of these Olympians to be its brand ambassador
Nike decided to hire average teenagers
as ambassadors for its brand endorsement.
I repeat, while adidas had Olympians
Nike hired average teenagers who were not known to anybody
as ambassadors to endorse its brand.
And came out with a beautiful masterpiece which literally, literally broke the Internet.
And this is what the commercial looked like.
Now, if you looked at that commercial closely, you must have realized
that just like Coca-Cola leveraged the emotion of happiness
to communicate its idea.
Nike leverages the emotion of inspiration to communicate its idea.
In both cases, both these brands
are trying to give you an involuntary experience of their commercial.
And if you look at Nike's commercial even more closely, you will see
that they don't want to talk about Usain Bolt.
They want to talk about the Usain Bolt spirit within every single individual
like you and like me.
And if you are somebody who is pushing your limits
every single day to become a better version of yourself
that Nike commercial is literally depicting your own story.
And because Nike managed to strike a cord with local champions
it was able to go trending and Nike was trending number one on YouTube
one week after the Olympics started
with 4.5 million views.
As compared to that,
adidas was at number three with only 2.9 million views.
And that's how without being the title sponsor,
without paying $150 million
and without actually using the banned keywords
Nike managed to steal the thunder from adidas
and emerged as a champion in this marketing war.
Now, we've got 3 very important lessons to learn from this entire case study.
Number one, do you realize
that even if Nike had not tried so hard
if the Olympics happened without Nike coming out with its 'Find Your Greatness' commercial
people would still remember Nike, right?
Nike wouldn't be forgotten and yet
Nike put in this extra efforts to actually come out with a beautiful commercial
to beat adidas inspite of all odds.
And that is because Nike, as a brand, realizes
that the only difference between ordinary and extraordinary
is that little extra.
In this case, it's Nike's efforts
to emerge as a legend inspite of all odds.
Number two,
people might forget what you said but they will never ever forget how you made them feel
and Nike's commercial is a classic depiction of this quote.
So, if you pick up some work to do, just make sure that it's remarkable.
Because in this world 99% of the people are good
but 1% are great and that is only because
they choose to be great.
Because every single champion today understands
that good is imperative but greatness is always, always a choice.
And last and most importantly,
like the legend says
'Somehow we have come to believe that greatness is meant only for a chosen few
that greatness is only meant for the superstar
but the truth is- greatness is for everyone.
It's not about lowering the expectation but about raising it for each one of us
because greatness is not in one special person or one special place
greatness is wherever somebody is trying to find it.
So, my dear friend, my question to you is
What are you doing to find your greatness?
