The Genius Marketing Strategy of Marlboro Cigarettes.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

People, on the historic date of 11th of January 1964,
it was officially declared by the United States government
that cigarette causes cancer.
And within a day an $8 Billion dollar tobacco industry and the incomes of 7,50,000 families was at stake.
While most companies saw their sales dropping down
there was one company that miraculously went from having just 1% market share
to becoming the 4th largest cigarette brand in the world
in less than one year.
And after 1970 when cigarette advertisements were permanently banned from televisions
this brand became even more popular
to go on to become the largest manufacturer of cigarettes in the world.
This brand that I'm talking about goes by the name Marlboro.
And Marlboro today is so huge that
it has got more consumers than it's next 10 competitors combined.
The question is - What the hell did they do ?
because of which the very same cancer report and the ban which is essentially supposed to kill it's business
ended up becoming a stepping stone for Marlboro to become a $58 Billion brand.
The answer to this question lies in one of the most iconic marketing strategies
ever witnessed by mankind.
which is called lifestyle marketing.
Now let's try to understand this using a very simple example that is closer to home.
If you are a 90s kid and you watched Sachin Tendulkar play
I bet you that at some point in your life or someone in you're friend circle
must have bought an MRF bat.
And chances are that when you visited the store
you knew nothing about English Willow, Kashmir Willow.
You did not care which wood the bat was made of.
You did not care whether it was original or duplicate, you just wanted a bat.
And then you had two choices
bats with no stickers or bats with MRF stickers.
And you chose the MRF bat by default
And then after that god knows after how many years later you realised
that the fullform of MRF is Madras Rubber Factory.
And the fact that MRF is primarily a rubber tyre manufacturing company
which just happened to sponsor Sachin Tendulkar.
Later on this very same thing happened to Reebok when Dhoni started using Reebok bats.
Now here the question is - is it a coincidence that millions of children all across the country
were so stupid to mindlessly buy a bat with a sticker of a rubber tyre company ?
If not, then how the hell did this even happen ?
Well, here's where the magic of lifestyle marketing happens.
We all idolised Sachin Tendulkar and we all wanted to be like Sachin Tendulkar.
So subconsciously, the MRF bats made us feel as if
we were holding the exact same bat as Sachin Tendulkar himself.
So to put that straight, what we essentially bought into
when we bought MRF bats is not the bat itself
but the connect that it had with our idol, that is, Sachin Tendulkar
because we wanted to be like Sachin Tendulkar.
Now in the US the same thing happened to Nike's Air Jordan shoes lineup
wherein when Nike signed up Michael Jordan
the fascination for Air Jordan shoes became so crazy
that even today, after 18 years of Michael Jordan's retirement
he still makes $100 million dollars every single year just in royalty.
This is what we call as lifestyle marketing wherein
consumers buy more into the lifestyle of the icon whose associated with the product
than the product itself.
And this is exactly what the marketeers of Marlboro cigarettes did to their brand.
After the 1964 report, which was released by the surgeon general of the US,
brands started to do everything in their capacity to keep their reputation.
Some brands tried to justify cigarettes while some brands completely disapproved the very research itself.
Back then Marlboro was a very small company that made cigarettes only for women.
But as soon as this news broke out
the parent company of Marlboro, which is Philip Morris
decided to shift their method of marketing
and became an epitome of business propaganda in the 20th century
So what the marketeers of Marlboro did is that
instead of justifying smoking and using statistics that were difficult to understand
they came out with a campaign called the Marlboro Man.
wherein they introduced a character who was supposedly everything a man wanted to be like.
and they named this character "The Marlboro Man".
Marlboro Man was a cowboy who had perfectly built up body
and the commercial showcased him as the ultimate architype of manhood.
He was tough, affectionate and stylish and overall stood as the icon of freedom and manliness.
And just as we kids bought into MRF bats
men of the 1960s were so fascinated by the Marlboro man
and started buying Marlboro cigarettes
that the commercial became a massive game changer for the company.
And within a year Marlboro went from having less than 1% market share
to becoming the 4th largest cigarette manufacturer in the world.
And the fun fact is in all of those commercials
cigarette was not even the primary subject of focus.
In fact, cigarette as a product got less than 10 seconds of time footage time
in all of those commercials.
And because of this even when cigarette commercials were permanently banned from television
and brands couldn't show cigarettes in commercials or TV,
Marlboro was very easily able to navigate through that situation
because their focus was anyways not on cigarettes but on Marlboro Man himself.
And that is how they were able to communicate their emotion very easily
even through print and magazine.
And this is the reason why even after the 1970 ban
Marlboro's business still kept growing.
In fact, the sales skyrocketed because the rest of the brands were struggling
to market their brands without showing their products.
And that is how Marlboro became a legend in advertising
and laid the foundation for Marlboro to become a $58 billion brand.
Now, more than a business lesson there is a very very important life lesson
that we all need to learn from this iconic case study.
People, just like Marlboro in the 1960s, even today
what we often fail to realize is that
we are constantly being bombarded with lifestyle cigarette commercials
that do not appear as ads but in the form of pop culture icons.
Now, this includes a James Bond appearance
wherein he appears in a tucks and symbolises gentlemanliness
or Kabir Singh who is portrayed as the epitome of manliness.
Now, regardless of how lucrative they look
what is important for us to understand is that
they are merely tapping onto your insecurities to convince you to do something
which will give you a feeling as if you are an elevated version of yourself.
But the truth is
because of your lack of self awareness
you don't realise that your insecurities are putting money into their pockets
eventually to make those companies billions of dollars
but to turn you into a sick, miserable addict
of either cigarettes or social validation, depending on what you're buying into.
So keep your eyes open and do not fall into these traps.
And last and most importantly
my big brother's advice to you is
"Always remember that buying dumb sh*t will never make you feel happier
or make you a better version of yourself.
The only thing that will make you feel better is your acceptance of your insecurities and imperfections.
And at the end of the day if you do not embrace your insecurities
some billion dollar brand will dig into your misery and
and make a fortune out of it."