Zerodha Case Study: Bootstrapped to Billion dollar valuation startup without advertisements!

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

People, Zerodha is by far one of the most fascinating business case studies in the Indian startup ecosystem.
In just 10 years, Zerodha went from 0 to $1 billion in valuation.
On one side where tech companies are on a cash drain
wherein they are incurring million dollar losses
Zerodha has been very elegantly profitable with a profit of more than ₹400 crores.
And here's why it is mindblowing.
all of this was done with zero funding and zero marketing.
I REPEAT.
Zerodha went from zero to $1 billion in valuation
with zero marketing and zero funding.
The question is- In this noisy world wherein companies are pouring in millions of dollars
just to survive in the market
how is it possible that Zerodha has been able to achieve something so incredible
with zero funding and zero marketing.
The answer to this question comes from one of the most legendary entrepreneurs
in the Indian startup ecosystem
who goes by the name Kunal Shah.
In 2016, Kunal Shah delivered an INKtalk wherein he proposed a very interesting theory
which more or less explains
the root cause of the success of some of the biggest startups in the world.
According to Kunal Shah,
in this world there are a ton of systems which have a ton of inefficiencies and hurdles
which often prevent ordinary people like you and me
from moving into a more efficient system.
But we human beings
once we find an efficient system
we have this innate ability to move on
from where we never ever come back.
As a result of which
if an entrepreneur is able to build a startup in such a way
that he is able to fix these inefficiencies
and is able to help ordinary people overcome the hurdle.
He/she will be able to build a startup which will bring about a revolution.
And their startup will be such a revolution
that it'll be bring about an irreversible paradigm shift in the behaviour of the consumers.
And once this is done
that startup will gain 3 massive superpowers
which will boost that startup to another level altogether.
These 3 superpowers are: Number one, high cosumer tolerance.
Number two,
unique brand proposition which will result into word of mouth.
And thirdly,
it will result into an irreversible shift.
A very simple example that is closer to home is WhatsApp.
If you see, all of us are using WhatsApp
but none of us are using WhatsApp because of an advertisement.
If you look WhatsApp as a system, back then, before WhatsApp
even to send a local text we used to think twice because
1 message used to cost us 1 rupee.
And forget international calls, even to make a normal call we used to think twice because
you'd run out of balance.
But then when WhatsApp arrived, it took off all these hurdles and today.
texting has become completely effortless, that's the reason why we spam a lot of people
and that's the reason why you receive 'Good Morning' texts.
And if you look at calls,
even making international calls does not look like a big deal today.
And most importantly
if you see, you cannot even imagine going back to your texting days.
So, if you see
there are 3 major superpowers that WhatsApp gained as a startup.
which boosted WhatsApp to another level altogether.
Number one,
unique brand proposition which resulted into word of mouth.
As in, WhatsApp gave you something
that you had never seen before, as a result of which
customers were screaming at each other to use WhatsApp
as a result of which
WhatsApp was able to go from 0 to 400 million users in less than 5 years.
And today, WhatsApp has more than 2 billion users.
Number two, like I said
we cannot even imagine going back to our old texting days, as a result of which
there is an irreversible change in our behaviour.
And lastly, when we come to high tolerance
if you see,
inspite of the creepy WhatsApp Privacy Policy
you are still using WhatsApp.
Inspite of us understanding the dangers of WhatsApp forwards
we are still using WhatsApp.
And inspite of call lagging
we still do make WhatsApp calls. So if you see,
we have developed very high tolerance towards WhatsApp
wherein even if they make big mistakes, we are extremely tolerant towards it.
And we will still keep using the service
as a result of which
customer retention-which is one of the most difficult things to do-
is done in a way that nobody can even imagine.
So, this is how by fixing the inefficiencies of the texting system
the founders of WhatsApp were able to claim their pot of gold
as a result of which they were able to create massive wealth
eventually sold WhatsApp for $19 billion to Facebook.
And the founders of Zerodha did exactly the same.
Before Zerodha Nikhil Kamath observed
that there were 3 major hurdles that were troubling the existing investors
and were also preventing common people of India from investing into the stock market.
And these 3 hurdles were: Number one, lack of knowledge and awareness.
As you all know, in India
we make more life decisions based on myths and emotions
rather than knowledge and strategy.
The second hurdle they observed was that of brokerage fees
as in
the conventional brokerage firms were charging a percentage commission
on the amount of investment the investor was making
which resulted into exorbidant brokerage fees.
And third and most importantly,
the entire process of investment was very very tedious
and very complex for a common man to understand.
And that is the reason why
they came out with 3 unique solutions
which turned Zerodha into a billion dollar company.
The first solution they came out with was to tackle the lack of knowledge and awareness
as a result of which
to educate the Indian population, they gave came out with something called Zerodha Varsity
which is an extensive collection of stock market and financial lessons
wherein anybody can go out there and understand how the market functions
eventually, to gain enough knowledge
to make a strategic investment.
And after learning from here
any newbie can go out there and make a confident investment
as a result of which
then and there itself
Zerodha started commanding the loyalty of the newbies.
The second solution they came out with
was to discount the brokerage fees to such a large extent
that it literally resulted into a revolution.
Like I said before, most firms were charging a percentage commission
as in, if you were making an investment of a few lakhs
you'd have to pay tens of thousands of just brokerage.
And guess what?
Zerodha turned this into a super efficient and super affordable system
wherein
they charged ₹20 or 0.03% whichever is less
for all intraday trades.
And guess what?
they charged zero fees
for all equity and direct mutual fund investment.
And third and most importantly
in order to resolve the tedious and complex process of investment
they used the internet and came out with a beautiful website
and a very simple user interface for their mobile application.
Using which any common man can get familiar with the entire process of investment
without any hassles
and with 100% transparency.
And if you're also a newbie in the world of investment
you can use the link below to create your Zerodha account today
and jumpstart your investment journey.
And that is how, by fixing these 3 problems
the founders of Zerodha claimed their pot of gold
as a result of which today
Zerodha is a billion dollar company
with zero investment in marketing
because the consumers were screaming at each other to use Zerodha.
And today,
4 million investors
are making their investments using the platform of Zerodha.
Now, the question is- What do we as entrepreneurs have to learn from this incredible case study.
People, we all need to understand
that funding is one of the ways to accelerate your startup
but not the only way to do so.
So, if you are somebody who is reluctant to pursue your idea
because you are waiting for funding
I would highly recommend you to do some introspection and see
how you can proceed ahead without funding.
And last and most importantly, we all need to realize the fact
that there are hundreds if not thousands of pots of gold all around us
in the form of inefficient systems.
And each one of them
offers ordinary people like you and me
the opportunity to go out there and claim our pot of gold
eventually to build a business empire out of it.
The only question that we've gotta ask ourselves is
Are we going to crib about the problem or are we going to fix the problem?
And this attitude of crib or fix
will eventually decide our destiny.